Remote Patient Monitoring via Non-Invasive Digital Technologies A Systematic Review
Abstract Background: We conducted a systematic literature review to identify key trends associated with remote patient monitoring (RPM) via noninvasive digital technologies over the last decade. Materials and Methods: A search was conducted in EMBASE and Ovid MEDLINE. Citations were screened for relevance against predefined selection criteria based on the PICOTS (Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcomes, Timeframe, and Study Design) format. We included studies published between January 1, 2005 and September 15, 2015 that used RPM via noninvasive digital technology (smartphones/personal digital assistants [PDAs], wearables, biosensors, computerized systems, or multiple components of the formerly mentioned) in evaluating health outcomes compared to standard of care or another technology. Studies were quality appraised according to Critical Appraisal Skills Programme. Results: Of 347 articles identified, 62 met the selection criteria. Most studies were randomized control trials with older adult populations, small sample sizes, and limited follow-up. There was a trend toward multicomponent interventions (n=26), followed by smartphones/PDAs (n=12), wearables (n=11), biosensor devices (n=7), and computerized systems (n=6). Another key trend was the monitoring of chronic conditions, including respiratory (23%), weight management (17%), metabolic (18%), and cardiovascular diseases (16%). Although substantial diversity in health-related outcomes was noted, studies predominantly reported positive findings. Conclusions: This review will help decision makers develop a better understanding of the current landscape of peer-reviewed literature, demonstrating the utility of noninvasive RPM in various patient populations. Future research is needed to determine the effectiveness of RPM via noninvasive digital technologies in delivering patient healthcare benefits and the feasibility of large-scale implementation. Keywords: e-health, m-health, telehealth, telemedicine
Introduction Remote patient monitoring (RPM) has enhanced clinicians ability to monitor and manage patients in nontraditional healthcare settings. RPM uses digital technologies to collect health data from individuals in one location, such as a patient's home, and electronically transmit the information to healthcare providers in a different location for assessment and recommendations. More specifically, noninvasive technologies are now commonly being integrated into disease management strategies to provide additional patient information, with the goal of improving healthcare decision-making. Digital technologies are continually being adopted as an additional method for healthcare systems to increase patient contact and augment the practice of preventive medicine. Healthcare professionals have the ability to share health data with remotely based clinical experts for consultation, saving time and expense for practitioners and patients, and actively managing treatments for those with chronic conditions. Health data are typically transmitted to healthcare professionals in facilities such as monitoring centers in primary care settings, hospitals and intensive care units, skilled nursing facilities, and centralized management programs, among others. Diversity exists in the design of noninvasive digital technologies for RPM as well as in the role of the patient. For example, some noninvasive digital devices may be automated to capture and transmit health data without any action from the patient (i.e., biosensor or wearable devices); whereas, other technologies may require the patient to submit their own health data through a secure Web site, smartphone, or personal digital assistant (PDA). Common clinical data captured by these technologies include vital signs, weight, blood pressure, oxygen levels, and heart rate. Publications to date have used different terminology to capture the essence of RPM (e.g., telehealth, telemedicine, e-Health) and the overall language used to describe RPM is inconsistent and still being established. Inconsistency in terminology may be attributed to the evolution of this particular group of technologies. As science and technology continue to advance, RPM has transitioned from capturing remote patient data through telephone interviews and videoconferencing to utilizing automated devices (e.g., biosensor devices) and focusing on particular patient populations (e.g., chronic diseases). A systematic review of the term e-health identified 51 unique definitions for the term with no clear consensus on the meaning. Another review noted the term telemedicine is used interchangeably with the term e-health (i.e., communication networks used to deliver healthcare services or health information from one geographical location to another). Definitions may also be based on the patient's health condition and how RPM technologies gather and send health data back into the health system. In light of these variances, this study focused on a patient-centered definition of RPM: an ambulatory, noninvasive digital technology used to capture patient data in real time and transmit health information for assessment by a health professional or for self-management. While many RPM interventions have been adopted on a small scale, large-scale implementation continues to be a challenge. To gain clinical credibility, many RPM technologies are tasked with the "burden of evidence" by publishing in the peer-reviewed literature. Due to the relative infancy of this realm of healthcare, we aim to summarize the current level of evidence to date by completing a comprehensive systematic literature review, and applying the same level of rigor required in the evaluation of other healthcare interventions. Hence, the objective of this systematic review was to identify studies reporting the use of patient-centered RPM via noninvasive digital technologies in the past decade and describe the key trends, including patient and clinical characteristics and health-related findings by these technologies.
Materials and Methods A search was conducted in EMBASE (2005-2015) and Ovid MEDLINE (January 1, 2005 to September 15, 2015). The search strategy is provided in Supplementary Table S1 (Supplementary Data are available online at. An extensive list of search terms was used to identify all appropriate technologies. The study selection criteria were specified based on the Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcomes, Timeframe, and Study Design (PICOTS) format. The patient population included individuals enrolled in a health-related study where the intervention(s) was consistent with our definition of RPM via noninvasive digital technology. We subcategorized interventions based on technology, using the following definitions: Any smartphone or PDA device (or associated software/application/text messaging) that is used to transmit patient data to the physician/researcher. Any wearable device worn or placed on a body part to record a particular physiological change (e.g., respiratory rate sensors or blood pressure monitors). Any biosensor device for recording data from biological or chemical reactions (e.g., pulse oximeters or spirometers). A computerized system where data are entered by the patient over an internet connection. Multiple components containing more than one technology category above (e.g., biosensor device and computerized system ). The comparators for the review included either standard care or other technologies used to collect patient health data. Outcomes included any health-related outcomes captured by the RPM technology as well as the associated costs (if reported). Study designs included both randomized controlled trials (RCTs), observational studies, and systematic reviews published from January 1, 2005 to September 15, 2015; protocols, nonsystematic reviews, case studies, commentaries, and letters or editorials were excluded. Specific exclusion criteria were applied to narrow the focus of selected studies to those reporting patient health data captured via noninvasive RPM digital technologies. The predefined exclusion criteria included the following: interventions with invasive or implantable digital technology (e.g., implantable cardiac defibrillators, blood glucose monitors) or nondigital technology (i.e., landline telephone as the only source of data transmission); no remote monitoring of patient data (e.g., treatment algorithm); no real-time data capture (i.e., participants can only access the device at prescheduled times); and if the data acquired by a device were limited to only patient-reported outcomes, survey responses, or drug performance/adherence.
STUDY SELECTION PROCESS All citations identified from the literature search were screened for relevance. The first level of screening involved an assessment of citation abstracts for relevance by a single reviewer, based on specific exclusion criteria. Two reviewers were consulted to determine whether any uncertain abstracts were to be included. The second level of screening involved a review of the full-text articles identified from the level one screening to determine if these studies met the predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria listed above. This was undertaken by a single reviewer with four additional reviewers consulted to determine whether any uncertain articles were to be included or excluded based on the study selection criteria. QUALITY APPRAISAL OF LITERATURE The quality appraisal process utilized the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) checklists for RCTs, cohort studies, and case-control study designs. The CASP checklists evaluate the trustworthiness and relevance of studies based on three key areas: study validity (bias), study results (clinical importance and degree of certainty), and relevance (generalizability to patient or population of interest). Quality appraisal was conducted by two independent reviewers for included studies. Instances of disagreement between the two reviewers were identified and evaluated by a third reviewer. Observational, cross-sectional studies are not supported by a CASP quality appraisal checklist. Therefore, the findings from cross-sectional studies should be interpreted with caution. DATA COLLECTION/STUDY VARIABLES Due to the high degree of variability in the study designs and objectives, information was extracted to descriptively assess trends and frequencies of the predefined study variables, including the following: technology category, country setting, patient characteristics, and feedback loop. The health outcomes reported by the included studies were broadly defined as positive, negative, or neutral health outcomes, depending on the impact of the intervention on the study outcomes of interest. Clinical or statistical significance was required for a positive categorization as many studies reported only descriptive findings without any supporting statistical analysis. Cost outcomes were also collected, if reported.
Results The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram graphically represents the citations reviewed, included, or excluded during the course of the systematic review process. The database search identified 345 articles with two additional articles identified from manual searching. Of the 347 articles identified, 62 articles met the study inclusion criteria. QUALITY APPRAISAL The majority of the 62 studies included in the systematic review used an RCT design. Most of the RCT studies (N=44) received positive responses to the CASP checklist criteria, although one of the criteria regarding blinding of patients and study personnel (to the RPM intervention) was reported by only 10 of the RCTs. The cohort studies (n=7) and case-control study (n=1) also had primarily positive responses after being reviewed by the CASP checklists, whereas the remaining studies (n=10) were observational, cross-sectional study designs with no quality appraisal performed.
OVERALL TRENDS: RPM NONINVASIVE DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY RPM with noninvasive digital technologies is becoming more available for monitoring and collecting patient healthcare information. The figure illustrates the number of published RPM with noninvasive digital technology studies, by technology category, included in the systematic review over the last decade. Funding of included studies were mainly from government and nonprofit organizations. The breakdown of technology categories included in the current systematic review is illustrated in a figure. Overall, 12 studies were identified using a smartphone or PDA, 11 studies utilized wearable devices, 7 studies utilized biosensor devices, 6 studies included computerized systems, and 26 studies comprised multiple technologies. The patient populations of the included studies were predominantly adults, 20 years of age or older, with only 5% of studies including children or adolescents (<20 years of age). Many studies recruited specific adult age groups: young adults between 21 and 39 years of age (5% of studies), older adults between 40 and 64 years of age (18%), and seniors $\ge65$ years old (10%). Overall, the majority (61%) of studies included a mix of younger and older adult populations. The clinical characteristics of the included studies showed a dominance of chronic disease populations. The most prevalent conditions included the following: 23% respiratory diseases (e.g., asthma), 18% weight management, 18% metabolic diseases (e.g., type 1 and 2 dia-betes), and 16% cardiovascular diseases (e.g., heart failure.) All studies included elements of a feedback loop, however, the end user or recipient of the captured data varied greatly across the included studies. The majority included physicians or nurses as the main recipient of patient health data (31% and 16%, respectively). In 18% of studies, the end user of the captured data was the patient. These studies primarily utilized smartphones/PDAs or computerized systems to enable self-monitoring of patient lifestyle behaviors (i.e., caloric intake and exercise).
KEY TRENDS BY NONINVASIVE DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY The key trends for each of the technology categories are listed in a table, diversity among the technologies was shown across all of the study variables. Only studies on computerized systems were found to be primarily conducted within the United States, and studies on smartphones/PDAs were evenly split between U.S. and non-U.S. settings. In terms of clinical and patient characteristics, patients with respiratory disorders/diseases and metabolic conditions were primarily monitored through multicomponent interventions. In contrast, weight management was mainly monitored through computerized systems, and patients with cardiovascular diseases were mainly monitored using biosensor devices. The vast majority of studies including adults $\ge20$ years (incorporating both younger and older adult populations), primarily utilizing multiple-component technologies. Of the three studies including adolescents or children (2 of the 3 used wearable devices).